Improve conversion of resource attributes to/from prometheus (#2381)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: specification/metrics/datamodel.md

#### Resource Attributes

When scraping a Prometheus endpoint, resource attributes MUST be added to the
scraped metrics to distinguish them from metrics from other Prometheus
endpoints. In particular, `service.name` and `service.instance.id`, are needed
to ensure Prometheus exporters can disambiguate metrics using
[`job` and `instance` labels](https://Prometheus.io/docs/concepts/jobs_instances/#jobs-and-instances)
as [described below](#resource-attributes-1).

The following attributes MUST be associated with scraped metrics as resource
attributes, and MUST NOT be added as metric attributes:

| OTLP Resource Attribute | Description |
| ----------------------- | ----------- |
| `service.name` | The configured name of the service that the target belongs to |

> | `service.instance.id` | A unique identifier of the target.  By default, it should be the scraped URL |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `service.instance.id` | A unique identifier of the target.  By default, it should be the <host>:<port> of the scraped URL |
```

`instance` will default to the `__address__` label, which is \<host\>:\<port\>.

#### Resource Attributes

When scraping a Prometheus endpoint, resource attributes MUST be added to the
scraped metrics to distinguish them from metrics from other Prometheus
endpoints. In particular, `service.name` and `service.instance.id`, are needed
to ensure Prometheus exporters can disambiguate metrics using
[`job` and `instance` labels](https://Prometheus.io/docs/concepts/jobs_instances/#jobs-and-instances)
as [described below](#resource-attributes-1).

The following attributes MUST be associated with scraped metrics as resource
attributes, and MUST NOT be added as metric attributes:

| OTLP Resource Attribute | Description |
| ----------------------- | ----------- |
| `service.name` | The configured name of the service that the target belongs to |

> | `service.instance.id` | A unique identifier of the target.  By default, it should be the <host>:<port> of the scraped URL |

Author: fixed

The following attributes SHOULD be associated with scraped metrics as resource
attributes, and MUST NOT be added as metric attributes:

| OTLP Resource Attribute | Description |
| ----------------------- | ----------- |

> | `net.host.name` | The <host> portion of the target's URL that was scraped |

Author: fixed

| `net.host.port` | The <port> portion of the target's URL that was scraped |
| `http.scheme` | `http` or `https` |

In addition to the attributes above, the
["target" info](https://github.com/OpenObservability/OpenMetrics/blob/main/specification/OpenMetrics.md#supporting-target-metadata-in-both-push-based-and-pull-based-systems)
metric family is used to supply additional resource attributes. If present,
"target" info MUST be dropped from the batch of metrics, and all labels from
the "target" info metric family MUST be converted to resource attributes
attached to all other metrics which are part of the scrape. By default, label
keys and values MUST NOT be altered (such as replacing `_` with `.` characters

> in keys).

Reviewer 2: This is an important and interesting difference. We may suffer because of this, but I think we can provide a transform processor capability for this.

Author: Yeah, i'm definitely on-board with working around this with processors, etc.  We just can't do that by default, since we won't always be correct about our guess.

| OTLP Resource Attribute | Description |
| ----------------------- | ----------- |
| `service.name` | The configured name of the service that the target belongs to |
| `net.host.name` | The <host> portion of the target's URL that was scraped |

> | `net.host.port` | The <port> portion of the target's URL that was scraped |

Reviewer: While the default value of `instance` will be the `__address__` that has host and port, relabeling rules seem to often change that, potentially in ways that make this mapping inappropriate.

Author: Are you worried that if someone relabels instance, that it the relabeled value won't be properly reconstructed in the exporter, or that we won't be able to always host/port attributes when scraping?

Reviewer: As long as we only combine `net.host.name` and `net.host.port` with a `:` when the port is non-empty, reconstruction is probably not an issue.  I'm more worried about times when the `instance` label is relabeled to something that is not a hostname and then exported through OTLP or some other exporter that doesn't convert back to `instance`.

Author: WDYT about using `service.instance.id` as instance?  I.e. `instance` prom label -> `service.instance.id` resource attribute -> `instance` prom label.  Since job + instance are expected to be unique in Prometheus, it would make sense to convert`service.name` + `service.namespace` + `service.instance.id` to `job` + `instance` when exporting to prometheus.

Reviewer: That seems reasonable to me.

Author: Done

#### Resource Attributes

> In SDK Prometheus (pull) exporters, resource attributes SHOULD be converted to the [`target_info`](https://github.com/OpenObservability/OpenMetrics/blob/main/specification/OpenMetrics.md#supporting-target-metadata-in-both-push-based-and-pull-based-systems) metric, or MUST be dropped, and MUST NOT be attached as labels to other metrics. The `target_info` metric MUST info-typed metric whose labels MUST include the resource attributes, and MUST NOT include any other labels. There MUST be at most one `target_info` metric exposed on a Prometheus endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In SDK Prometheus (pull) exporters, resource attributes SHOULD be converted to the [`target_info`](https://github.com/OpenObservability/OpenMetrics/blob/main/specification/OpenMetrics.md#supporting-target-metadata-in-both-push-based-and-pull-based-systems) metric; otherwise, they MUST be dropped, and MUST NOT be attached as labels to other metrics. The `target_info` metric MUST be an info-typed metric whose labels MUST include the resource attributes, and MUST NOT include any other labels. There MUST be at most one `target_info` metric exposed on a Prometheus endpoint.
```

> In SDK Prometheus (pull) exporters, resource attributes SHOULD be converted to the [`target_info`](https://github.com/OpenObservability/OpenMetrics/blob/main/specification/OpenMetrics.md#supporting-target-metadata-in-both-push-based-and-pull-based-systems) metric; otherwise, they MUST be dropped, and MUST NOT be attached as labels to other metrics. The `target_info` metric MUST be an info-typed metric whose labels MUST include the resource attributes, and MUST NOT include any other labels. There MUST be at most one `target_info` metric exposed on a Prometheus endpoint.

Reviewer 2: > There MUST be at most one `target_info` metric exposed on a Prometheus endpoint.

Is this a requirement in Prometheus as well?

Author: From https://github.com/OpenObservability/OpenMetrics/blob/main/specification/OpenMetrics.md#supporting-target-metadata-in-both-push-based-and-pull-based-systems :

"An exposer may include an Info MetricFamily called "target" with a **single Metric** with no labels with the metadata."

It doesn't explicitly say that an exposer can't have multiple "target" info metrics (just that they MAY have one), but clearly the intention is to have one.  I wanted to state it more clearly for our exporters.

Reviewer 2: I think the "metric" in OM is different than the "metric" in OTel. Metric in otel is metricfamily I believe in OM... Also OM Metric does not have a name, that belongs to `metricfamily`.

I would use their terminology "An exposer may include an Info MetricFamily called "target" with a single Metric with no labels with the metadata. An example in the text format might be"

Author: You are right.  I've cleaned up the language.  OM has [`metric family`](https://github.com/OpenObservability/OpenMetrics/blob/main/specification/OpenMetrics.md#metricfamily) (OTel Metric) and [`metric point`](https://github.com/OpenObservability/OpenMetrics/blob/main/specification/OpenMetrics.md#metricpoint) (OTel datapoint).

> In the Collector's Prometheus pull and push (remote-write) exporters, it is possible for metrics from multiple targets to be sent together, so targets must be disambiguated from one another.  However, the Prometheus exposition format and [remote-write](https://github.com/Prometheus/Prometheus/blob/main/prompb/remote.proto) formats do not include a notion of resource, and expect metric labels to distinguish scraped targets.  By convention, [`job` and `instance`](https://Prometheus.io/docs/concepts/jobs_instances/#jobs-and-instances) labels distinguish targets and are expected to be present on metrics exposed on a Prometheus pull exporter (a ["federated"](https://Prometheus.io/docs/Prometheus/latest/federation/) Prometheus endpoint) or pushed via Prometheus remote-write. In the collector Prometheus exporters, the `service.name` attribute MUST be converted to the `job` metric label, and the `net.host.name` and `net.host.port` attributes, if present, MUST be converted to the `instance` label as `<net.host.name>:<net.host.port>`. If `job` and `instance` are successfully added, other resource attributes SHOULD be converted to a [`target_info`](https://github.com/OpenObservability/OpenMetrics/blob/main/specification/OpenMetrics.md#supporting-target-metadata-in-both-push-based-and-pull-based-systems) metric, or MUST be dropped. The `target_info` metric is an info-typed metric whose labels MUST include the resource attributes, and MUST NOT include any other labels other than `job` and `instance`.  There MUST be at most one `target_info` metric exported for each unique combination of `job` and `instance`.

Reviewer 2: The prometheus remote write is not compatible with OpenMetrics (not sure about Prometheus Pull protocol). I am a bit confused about the suggestion to use target_info and the info metric.

nit: I would split this in multiple lines.

Author: Prometheus remote-write [protocol supports](https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/blob/main/prompb/types.pb.go#L37) info-typed metrics. The "target" info-typed metric is a convention introduced by OpenMetrics in [its spec](https://github.com/OpenObservability/OpenMetrics/blob/main/specification/OpenMetrics.md#supporting-target-metadata-in-both-push-based-and-pull-based-systems), but nothing prevents us from using the convention in our exporters.

I split lines in this paragraph.  If you'd like it done for the entire prom spec, I can open a separate PR to do that.

possible for metrics from multiple targets to be sent together, so targets must
be disambiguated from one another. However, the Prometheus exposition format
and [remote-write](https://github.com/Prometheus/Prometheus/blob/main/prompb/remote.proto)
formats do not include a notion of resource, and expect metric labels to
distinguish scraped targets. By convention, [`job` and `instance`](https://Prometheus.io/docs/concepts/jobs_instances/#jobs-and-instances)
labels distinguish targets and are expected to be present on metrics exposed on
a Prometheus pull exporter (a ["federated"](https://Prometheus.io/docs/Prometheus/latest/federation/)
Prometheus endpoint) or pushed via Prometheus remote-write. In OTLP, the
`service.name`, `service.namespace`, and `service.instance.id` triplet is
[required to be unique](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/da74730bf835010229a9612c281f052e26553218/specification/resource/semantic_conventions/README.md#service),
which makes them good candidates to use to construct `job` and `instance`. In
the collector Prometheus exporters, the `service.name` and `service.namespace`

> attributes MUST be combined as `<service.namespace>;<service.name>`, or

Reviewer 2: Can we use `<service.namespace>/<service.name>` "/" instead of ";"? Seems nicer ...

Author: done.  I was trying to use a less-commonly-used character to reduce collisions, but readability is probably more important.
